[[file:index.org][baile]]
* the same old theme(s)
#+SETUPFILE: https://gitlab.com/OlMon/org-themes/-/raw/master/src/retro_dark/retro_dark.theme
#+OPTIONS: num:nil
#+DATE: <2023-09-28>
[[https://i2-prod.belfastlive.co.uk/sport/rugby/article27788291.ece/ALTERNATES/s1200d/0_Ireland-rugby.jpg]]

To follow the Irish press is to watch the same media spectacles drag out
over and over. We find ourselves stuck in a perpetual /"then as
farce..."/, with each cycle more pathetic than the last. At the bare
minimum this current outrage has given us ample material, with our local
commentariat driving themselves insane over
[[https://ancamansoluis.substack.com/p/ireland-the-spectacle][a sport
barely played outside of their bubble.]] This insanity feels fitting
when you realise the extent to which the Rugby World Cup reflects the
world in which our ruling class and press reside - with the wider world
being reduced down to the Anglosphere and Friends, the working class
being given the choice of 'Hell or Munster', and Bank of Ireland
constantly being advertised. Not satisfied to just sing along to
Ireland's Call, our press has spent the last week endlessly praising the
decision to turn /'Zombie'/ into an awkward anthem for our rugby team,
relishing in the opportunity to self-flagellate. While there's no point
in actually engaging with this media circus in good faith, I think it
offers us a good excuse to understand the mindset that drives the Irish
ruling class.

** what's in their heads?
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: whats-in-their-heads
:END:
While the initial decision to play /'Zombie'/ was likely driven by
Dolores O'Riordan happening to come from Limerick, its disproportionate
praise from the Irish media reflects the bad politics the track
espouses. The song is seeped in what can only be described as Sindo
Mindset, reflecting an intentional ignorance of the Nationalist
community that was actively cultivated within the twenty-six county
state. The underlying causes of the Troubles and Irish Revolution are
shoddily airbrushed out of existence, instead being replaced by the
vague platitudes that arose from Section 31. Violence is solely
perpetrated by zombified natives singing the /"same old theme since
1916"/, with outrage only arising when the civilised English are on the
receiving end.

Rather than actually understanding the causes that lead to the tragedies
of the Troubles (or even acknowledging the colonial violence inherent to
British occupation), /'Zombie'/ solely provides us with an active denial
of its existence. While O'Riordan's call of /"it's not me, it's not my
family"/ may be genuine, it does very little beyond parroting the
'Ulsterisation, Normalisation, and Criminalisation' approach of the
British state. /'Zombie'/ cuts deep for the Irish commentariat as it
reflects the fundamental division of humanity necessary for colonial
occupation to function, with the barbarous natives being depicted as
inhuman monsters. The song depicts and reflects an active denial of the
values that drove the Irish Revolution, the notion of an Ireland
separate from empire, and the political agency of the masses. There's a
reason why we hear more about this song than /'Dreams'/, even if both
songs are fairly shite at riling up stadium crowds.

[[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h32lWyHHmcs][Irish supporters
Cranberries ZOMBIE 23 09 23 rugby world cup - after Ireland vs South
Africa üçÄüçÄüçÄ - YouTube]]
** the same old theme(s)
The cyclical nature of
each media circus becomes abundantly clear once I start listing all the
times I've tried writing this paragraph. I originally intended on
writing this essay in response to the Spice Bag controversy, with an art
piece depicting the Garda√≠ overseeing an eviction drawing the ire of the
ruling class. My inability to finish anything necessitated changing
tracks and instead covering the controversy around the Wolf Tones
performing at Electric Picnic, with yet another outrage cycle passing me
by. My extended procrastionation has yet to be punished on account of
how interchangable each outrage cycle has been, with the Irish media
being in a perpetual state of feigned outrage towards the supposed Sinn
F√©iner masses. We're stuck hitting the same wall over and over, finding
out all the words that can be used to be indignant.

Rather than driving myself insane, I've decided to try and focus on the
lines of continuity between each circus. One of these main lines is a
fundamental cynicism and faux-contrarianism, with a low view of the
masses being matched with the energy of a disappointed substitute
teacher's lecture. Fintan O'Toole's infamous [[https://www.irishtimes.com/opinion/2022/10/18/fintan-otoole-the-full-unexpurgated-version-of-up-the-ra/]['Up the Ra' article]] ,serving as an inherently masturbatory piece of writing. Rather than trying to contribute anything of note, O'Toole's piece exists to make its audience feel superior to the 'rabble', letting readers feel civilised in comparison to the dumb Shinners. Commentators
basked at the thought of this piece being in some way counter-cultural,
pretending to be brave for reinforcing the status quo. A similar trend
can be seen around the Spice Bag controversy, with the implication that
the Garda√≠ uphold immoral acts being seen as worse than the actual acts
themselves.

This cynicism extends itself to discussions of reunification, with the
commentariat often presenting itself as speaking on behalf of others.
Tying in with the urge to be contrarian, writers often claim to stand
for the oppressed Unionists in the six counties, with this group
coincidentally pushing the exact values the authors hold. Rather than
discussing the actual chances of a Border Poll being called under Sunak
or Starmer, the Irish press uses its supposed imminence to argue for the
further disintegration of Irish identity. In lieu of accepting Sinn
F√©in's gradual lurch towards the establishment, the press instead depict
them as a fundamental threat. We're somehow lead to believe that the
sacrifice of our flag, national anthem, or language will somehow
convince the masses to vote for unity - with the media's past disdain
for all three being conveniently ignored. The same figures that
[[https://www.broadsheet.ie/2018/06/13/ive-nothing-against-irish-speakers-but/][compared
Irish speakers to Neo-Nazis]] or
[[https://www.pressreader.com/ireland/irish-daily-mail/20160318/281749858469594][claimed
that the Tricolour only became acceptable during Italia 90]] now present
themselves as realists, claiming that both are an obstacle to unity.
Instead of continuing to admit these opinions outright, our ruling class
now launder them through a cynical depiction of working class Unionists.

** who fears to speak of easter week?
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID: who-fears-to-speak-of-easter-week
:END:
This constant faux-outrage is the result of fear, with the cause of this
fear being essential to enacting positive change in this country. Our
press are so haunted by the spectre of Sinn F√©in and Republicanism as
both have become associated with the democratic and populist politics
that have drawn our working class into taking action - no small feat
considering how thoroughly Sinn F√©in have rejected their past
radicalism. This fear stems back to the Revolution, with mass
participation from the 'rabble' being key to any of its success. I'm
reminded here of Declan Kiberd's description of the initial Gaelic
Revival as /"one of the earliest examples of a Worker's Education
Movement"/, with the masses being mobilised through culture to retake
what was theirs. While the Revival, Revolution, and Republican Movement
had their flaws, our ruling class instinctively know that working class
people organising themselves will end badly for them. Incidents such as
Jobstown are so traumatising for the worst RT√â panellists as they pave
the way for something new.

In her contribution to /'Saol Corrach: √âire i mbun r√©abhl√≥ide'/, R√≥is√≠n
N√≠ Ghairbh√≠ noted the extent to which the Irish Revolution benefited
from the past occupation of public spaces by Revivalists. By physically
seizing public spaces and involving the masses in cultural work, those
around the Revival were able to widen the public's imagination -
creating the notion that these spaces belong to the masses. While most
people in this country know something is wrong when it comes to our
ruling class, a lack of such efforts has meant that this energy has no
real direction. This lack of direction has been aided by Sinn F√©in's
rightward lurch, with the party
[[https://www.independent.ie/regionals/herald/sinn-fein-leader-gerry-adams-to-pay-his-water-charges-as-party-in-crisis/30650212.html][lagging
behind on water charges]],
[[https://www.thejournal.ie/special-criminal-court-review-2-5803404-Jun2022/][dropping
opposition to the Special Criminal Court]], and taking a lukewarm
approach towards the Cost of Living Crisis. In the absence of mass
politics, people essentially just find themselves winding the
commentariat up - voting Sinn F√©in out of spite and pushing /'Celtic
Symphony'/ up the charts. While it may be fun to extend a middle finger
to the worst ghouls in the country, the fact we've been reduced to it
points to a wider crisis in working-class consciousness.

Odr√°n de Bhaldraithe ends his excellent /'Neglect in the North of
Ireland'/ with the claim that /"what the North now suffers from most is
the neglect of revolutionary activity"/. It often feels as if these
constant cycles of outrage stem from a nationwide neglect of mass
politics - with there being a desperate need for a bridge between acts
of cultural rebellion and mass political mobilisation. We need to engage
with and learn from the best aspects of previous struggles, looking back
at past wins such as the campaign against water charges. Rather than
sitting by and laughing as our ruling class self-flagellate, we need to
build towards demonstrations such as
[[https://twitter.com/pb4p/status/1704849520155128120][October's Housing
and Cost of Living protest]]. If we want to stop hearing the smug claim
that our struggles only exist in our heads, we need to bring them back
to the streets. If anything, just to spite the Sunday Independent.
